# irreal

The idea for this project came about as a series of images I later drew down on paper.

Kyle, the protagonist, wakes up one morning to find his room resembling more of a 2D one the 3D one he was used to. Irreal follows Kyle through a series of 8 days and how his newly warped reality affects his mental health, his loved ones and his relationship with them. Through his journey, we come to realize Kyle is battling derealization/depersonalization, a dissociative disorder in which his reality and/or him does not feel real. Irreal came about as a response and a tool to help navigate people with derealization/depersonalization and explain the inexplainable to those around them.

Due to the constraits of final year, I decided to consider my graduation project as the first ladder. With only having experience in Arduino, I wanted to use that knowledge and intergrate it with an area that greatly interested me, but that I had no technical knowledge on - video games. I saw great potential in using video games as a tool to help those that were once in my shoes - waking up to find the world around them resemble a dreamlike reality they felt unfamiliar in. With many unsuccessful attempts, I initially intended to make the game from a first person perspective. Considering the nature of the game, I knew my research needed to be thorough. I ended up getting in touch with Unreal, a UK based charity for derealization and depersonalization. I had an hour long phone call with Heather, one of the founders of Unreal, who recommended I change my target audience. Instead of targeting people that have DRD/DPD, my targeted audience now became their loved ones. And suddenly my failure no longer felt as such, but instead it has been pointing me in the right direction. 

One of my biggest worries was the considerable possibility of triggering someone who is unaware of their DPD/DRD. With Heather's words ringing in my ear, Irreal took a 180 and turned into a visual novel. By taking the project in a vastly different direction, a visual novel allows for a certain kind of storytelling that is far better suited for such a complex theme. A visual novel also vastly decreases any possible unintentional damage to the user. I knew from the very beginning that I wanted to have a physical manifestation of how the character was feeling. I came up with a simple, yet affective, solution - a heart-shaped box with built-in RBD LEDs. When the user presses a certain option in the game, the LEDs would light up a certain colour and flash at a certain BPM. This lead me to another significant concern - what kind of narrative do I want to portray? The one of the helplessly mentally ill or the one of resolution and acceptance? I asked my 12 year old self that question and she hoped I answered with the latter. And I did. With the implementation of multiple endings, the user would be able to experience Kyle's story in multiple different ways. But ultimately, Irreal's main goal is to show that no one is beyond saving. Even those who deem otherwise. 

Due to the nature of my college course being hardware and software focused, I had to shift gears and centre my attention to the fundamental technicalities of the project. Through multiple attempts and prototypes, I found making a visual novel in Unity, combined with the serial communication between Unity and Arduino, without using a plugin incredibly difficult. Since the project deadline was approaching rapidly, I found a Unity plugin called Ardity, made by Daniel Wilches, that was ideal for the technical fundmentals of my project - it allows for the Arduino to be used as an output and Unity as an input. 

In this repository, you will find the script written by Daniel in Unity that I adapted for my project, the Arduino code I fully wrote myself, a picture of my final prototype working, the Fritzing schematic I made for the hardware part of my project and a template I made of what the visual novel might look like.

My plan going forward is to use a different software engine called Ren'Py that is a visual novel engine that is compatible with the Raspberry Pi, a small single-board computer.
